---
title: "Monday to Wednesday Summary and Thursday Action Items"
date: 2026-04-15
week: 1
contributor: Charlotte Albert
---

## Summary

I began my course this Monday, May 11, under the direction of Professor Matthew Pan. At our meeting on Monday, he discussed the two potential projects I would be working on:
- Robotic characters: Assist research assistant Gavin in the creation and implementation of a small robotic character able to fit on a desk. The character would interact and entertain human-users.
- Neuro-Robotic Performance: Contribute to the foundational development of neuro-robotic performance. Develop control architectures to enable fluid, multi-joint robotic behaviours, with a focus on mapping movement parameters informed by Laban Movement Analysis to robotic actuator commands. 

Before I am set on a designated project, I have been learning fundamental robotic control concepts through the textbook Robot Modelling and Control. So far, I have read through Chapters 1-5.

I have also been reading and familiarizing myself with relevant literature. I have read and taken notes on two publications so far:
- Dynamic Movement Primitives - A Framework for Motor Control in Humans and Humanoid Robots by Schaal
- Turkish Ice Cream Robot: Examining Playful Deception in Social Human-Robot Interactions

## Objectives

- Meet with Professor Pan from 12:00 - 12:30 to discuss work 
- Read through the following publications:
    - Social Life of Robot Arms
    - Realistic and Interactive Robot Gaze
    - Elegant

## Detailed Work Log

### Session 1: [Research Readings]

**Description**: 
Read through Social Life of Robot Arms and Realistic and Interactive Robot Gaze.

### Session 2: [Turkish Ice Cream Robot Demonstration]

Kieran showed me how to run the demonstration. 

**Notes**:
1. Ensure the intel NUC is correctly connected to the camera, with the usb in the front of the NUC. 

**Documentation**:
[Roy's description to run the robot](files/TIC/TIC_READ_ME.pdf)
[Picture of where to connect the camera to the NUC](files/TIC/IMG_1742.jpeg)

---

**Entry completed**: 2026-05-14 5:00