# From Automata to Animate Beings: the Scope and Limits of Attributing Socialness to Artificial Agents.
link: https://nyaspubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/nyas.13727

## Abstract
The mechanisms and consequences of attributing socialness to artificial agents has important implications for how we can use technology to lead more productive and fulfilling lives. Integrate recent findings on the factors that shape behavioral and brain mechanisms that support social interactions between humans and artificial agents. How visual and knowledge factors within the human observer shape attributions across dimensions of socialness. Based on the findings, cognitive reconstruction within the human observor is likely to be far more crucial in shaping interactions with artificial agents than previously thought, while the artificial agent's visual features are possibly of lesser importance.

## The Attribution of Socialness
A social interaction between two agents involves a complex cascade of expressions and reactions to social and emotional signals. During these interactions, we are not passive observers, but instead we actively construct the social nature of the other agent. We try to understand and explain the behavior and internal states of the other agent in terms of emotions, intentions, and beliefs. As we attribute emotions or intentions to other agents, artificial or not, we infer and attribute socialness to these agents. Socialness can be defines as the presence of intentional goal-directed recursive interactions with other beings. This process of attribution is closely related to the perception of other agents' minds, or the representation of their mental state. If we attribute socialness to an agent, we adopt "the intentional state stance," we view and treat the agent as rational, with beliefs, desires, and behavioral consistency. This is in contrast to the "design stance," in which we view and treat an agent based on knowledge of its function or design in which we view and treat an agent based on the knowledge of its function or design, or "physical stance," in which we view and treat an agent based on knowledge derived from physics and chemistry.

The attribution of socialness to artificial agents should not be viewed as a binary decision or an all-or-nothing process. An agent's socialness or the presence of intentional goal-directed recursive interactions with other beings is not dichotomous, but is instead a continuum constructed across multiple dimensions. Researchers have described at least two dimensions that summarize difference parts of socialness. People use **experience**, or the ability to sense and feel, and **agency**, the ability to plan and act, to distinguish the minds of agents. For instance, data suggests that people rate an adult human being as high on both experience and agency, a dog or chimp as high on experience and low on agency, and a robot as low on experience and medium on agency. 
Other researchers suggest a different but related distinction between **warmth** (similar to experience) and **competence** (similar to agency). Yet, other researchers discuss a distinction based on human nature (aspects related to emotion that allow for a human-inanimate distinction) and human uniqueness (aspects related to morality that allow for a human-animal distinction). Regardless of which distinction is used, the important point is that socialness can be distinguished on multiple dimensions. In order to be seen as a social being, an agent does not need to quality as social across all dimensions (having both agency and experience). While other researchers have discussed humanness or animacy, we mainly use socialness to highlight the notion of a continuum and multidimensionality, and to capture the full dimensions of these attributions. Socialness comprises capacities like actions, emotions, and intentions, and some scholars have argued that at its essence, **a social agent is an agent that is capable of influencing the behavior of another agent.**

The attribution of socialness is an ongoing, dynamic process between the perceived agent, and the observing agent, and is composed of many cues. Some of these cues are derived from features of the artificial agent, such as its **form and motion**, and are referred to as bottom-up or stimulus cues to socialness. Above and beyond these cues, recent studies, show that the **prior knowledge of the observer**, based upon beliefs, expectations, and experience, is key in the attribution of socialness. These observer-oriented factors are collectively referred to as top-down or knowledge cues to socialness. The distinction between these two types of cues provides the framework to distil and disentangle the factors that influence the attirbution of socialness to artificial agents.

Brain activity can serve as a "neural Turing test."

## Impact of Artificial Agent's Visual Features

### Form
With minimal cues present, people readily see faces in face-like objects or even random patterns, with similar activation patterns observed within dedicated brain areas implicated in person perception. While observers seldom attribute socialness to artificial agents below a specific threshold of human-likeness, this attribution linearly increases as the artificial agents gain an increasing number of human-like features. Studies examining these effects on social interactions with artificial agents show decreased human cooperation during direct economic interactions with a small humanoid robot compared to a person, and people are prone to punish artificial agents more than people. 

### Movement
It has been shown that videos featuring a handful of points following a biological motion profile, containing no further information on the form of the agent, can be used to distil not only direction and type of actions performed, but also the actor's emotions, gender, and identity. Some researchers have argued that biological motion might serve as a "life-detector" which helps us to detect conspecifics and other animals. 

The attribution of socialness to simple animated shapes: multiple studies found that the observation of animations of simple shapes or social animations featuring nonbiological, but self-propelled, motion not only triggers the attribution of goals and intentions to these shapes, but also robustly activates a core node of PPN. Activity in this region increases when movement parameters suggest an interaction between animated shapes and decreases when movement parameters suggest an interaction between animated shapes and decreases when movement parameters suggest less interactive and more random motion.

While biological motion is an important cue to socialness, a number of lines of evidence suggest that it is not necessary, instead the core networks implicated in social perception can be flexibly engaged when observing an artificial agent in action, depending on a number of other mostly stimulated-independent factors.

### Presence 
The first visual encounter with an artificial agent provides a human observer with a first indication of the agent's socialness. One important feature that supports social interactions is the physical colocation fo both or all agents in the same environment. To maximize experimental control and efficiency, most studies so far merely explore how people perceive other agents, which is a far leap from active social interaction during which each agent's ongoing behavior has the potential to influence and be influenced by the behavior of the other agent. 

Engaging in mutual gaze, compared to averted gaze, with a physically embodied robot increases engagement and can drive perceived human-likeness. Humans perceive a physically embodied and collocated robot more positively and persuasively than a visual representation of the same robot. People also recognize physically present robots' emotions more accurately and report higher levels of empathy for robots with whom they share the same space. A recent study showed that the presence of an android robot directly influences perceived humanness and spontaneous mimicry by participants. 

Activity in "regions" is decreased when participants believe that the gaze behavior of the avatar has a computer origin. 

Naturally, it seems likely that the prospect of social behaviors being present, and thus the potential for a human interaction partner to attribute socialness, is higher in a robot designed to look like a human than a robot with a more machine-like appearance. However, the attribution of socialness will not necessarily follow from a human-like visual appearance of the artificial agent only. As we describe below, beliefs, expectations, and the prior experience of the individual all contribute to attributions of socialness above and beyond the artificial agent's appearance. For instance, the previous experience of the human agent with a sophisticated mechanical robot or the unrealistic high expectation of the individual for a humanoid robot can counteract any effect of visual appearance. 

## Impact of Knowledge Cues the Human Observer
### Belief and Expectation
Top-down cognitive processes are endogenous to the perceiving/acting individual, driven by contexts, knowledge, or goals. Such processes can help facilitate perception, in that our past experience or knowledge can help us to formulate predictions about what is going to happen next. Internal knowledge representations guide visual processing, and importantly, the attribution of mental states influences the perception of social cues. 

The studies examined in this section begin to build a compelling case that the knowledge cues that a participant has when perceiving or interacting with another agent, whether human or artificial in appearance, have a strong impact on behavior and underlying brain circuits.

### Anthropomorphism and Dehumanization
Anthropomorphism can be defined as our propensity to attribute human-like qualities, characteristics, and behaviors, to nonhuman agents, entities, or objects, by the observer. The tendency to anthropomorphize animals, robots, and computers is a stable characteristic that is robust over time, and already present in young children. Research on anthropomorphism suggests that it is not the visual features of the agent but instead the knowledge factors and the social motivation of the observer that are central in attributing socialness to nonhuman agents.

When uncertainty and unpredictability increase, so does anthropomorphism: when participants interacted with an unpredictable robot, they rated this robot higher on anthropomorphic aspects such as having its own mind, intentions, free will, consciousness, desires, beliefs, and ability to experience emotions, compared to participants who interacted with a predictable robot. When asked to predict the behavior of an unfamiliar robot, participants' anthropomorphic judgements also increased, compared to when participants were not asked to predict its behavior. 

**An area ripe for future exploration concerns how predictability and appearance of the artificial agent interact with the belief and tendency of the human observer to anthropomorphize and the role of the ToM network, especially the MPFC in these processes.**

People favor a robot that belongs to their in-group and ascribe more human-like characteristics to these robots. Robots with human-like appearances threaten to blur the boundaries between humans, machines, and other artificial agents. This threat to human uniqueness can therefore reduce the attribution of socialness to artificial agents. 

It is not so much the features of the artificial agent that drive the attribution of socialness to artificial agents, but the belief and expectations of the human observer as well as their tendency to attribute human-like qualities to human and artificial agents as seenn in the process of anthropomorphism and dehumanization.

## Integrative Perspective
The representation of other agents' minds is a three-stage developmental process, which involves not just linking observed and executed acts, but also the first-person everyday experience of action-intention coupling, amd finally the ultimate step of understanding other agents by projection of one's own state onto another agent. This correspondence between self and other at multiple levels is vital to the attribution of socialness to artificial agents. As we have seen, this process is flexible in nature and the "like me" hypothesis provides a useful point of departure for contextualizing brain and behavioral findings about the impact of form, motion, knowledge, experience, anthropomorphizing, and dehumanization on the attribution of socialness to artificial agents. "Like me": behavioral overlap and increased engagement of the AON when participants observe familiar actions or interact with agents similar to themselves, while others do not. 

## Conclusions and Future Directions
Knowledge cues play an important role in socialness attributions, more so than stimulus cues. 
